# Python package

In this new part, you will discover another facet of the Python language that makes it a very powerful, modular and scalable language: the use of packages. 

Until now, when you had to rewrite a piece of code, you probably copied and pasted this piece of code that you had previously written. 

This is not very practical and above all, it is not DRY (**D**on't **R**epeat **Y**ourself). The ideal would be to have a library with all the code snippets, whether it's the ones you've written, or the ones from other developers. You could then have access to all these code snippets and reuse them over and over again in all your projects without having to copy and paste them. And that's exactly what PyPI does.

## What is PyPI ?

### Public Pypi
The **Py**thon **P**ackage **I**ndex is a repository of software for the Python programming language. PyPI helps you find and install software developed and shared by the Python community. 

You must know PyPI, and if you don't, you have already used it by doing : 
```
pip install package_name
```
### Personal PyPi
If you want to install packages from another source than PyPI, (for example, if your packages are proprietary), you can do it hosting a simple http server, running from the directory that contains the packages that need to be installed. [See more informations](https://pypi.org/project/private-pypi/)

## How to build your own python package ?
In order to properly package a Python package, you will first need to install the setuptools, wheel, and twine library.

```
pip install setuptools
pip install wheel
pip install -U twine
```

A python package can contain modules and sub-packages.

A "module" is any file consisting of Python code (i.e. any file with the .py extension) imported into another file or script.

Modules allow the separation and therefore a better organization of the code. Indeed, it is common in a project to split its code into different files that will contain coherent parts of the final program to facilitate the general understanding of the code, the maintenance and the team work if several people work on the project.

A subpackage is simply a folder containing one or more modules.

### Structure of a python package
Generally, when developing a small librairy, there is a strong tendency to put everything in a bulk folder. However, to create an installable package, it is much easier and cleaner to have a standard file organization. 

```
container/
 |
 +-- .gitignore
 +-- setup.py
 +-- README.md
 +-- LICENSE
 +-- MANIFEST.in
 +-- /your_package
    |
    + __init__.py
    + main.py
    + utils.py         
    etc ....

```

* `.gitignore` : files that git should ignore
* `setup.py` : a Python code file which is our installer.
* `MANIFEST.in` : a text file that lists the non-Python files we will include in the installation.
* `README.md` : a markdown file  will contain a presentation of the package.
* `LICENSE ` : Defines the license you want to use
* `/your_package/` : The core of your package. This is where all the code in your package will be.

In order to make a package, you need a project. For the example we will create a package that returns jokes about Chuck Noris. 

For now, we will concentrate on creating empty files to respect the folder structure seen previously.

1. Create a folder, this is the root folder that will contain our package. Its name does not matter. We will name it chuck_norris.

2. In this folder create a file , setup.py and README.md.

3. Create the folder that will contain the heart of our package. We will call it again chuck_norris.

4. In this folder, create  a file ``__init__.py`` and another facts.py. 

Perfect you should have a file structure like this! This is the minimum structure you need to make a package.

```
chuck_norris/
 |
 +-- setup.py
 +-- README.md
 +-- /chuck_norris
    |
    + __init__.py
    + facts.py
```

### The project

1. In the `facts.py` file, create a ``joke()`` function that will return one of the jokes below at random. 

```python
data = [
    "Chuck Norris doesn’t read books. He stares them down until he gets the information he wants.",
    "Time waits for no man. Unless that man is Chuck Norris.",
    "If you spell Chuck Norris in Scrabble, you win. Forever.",
    "Chuck Norris breathes air … five times a day.",
    "In the Beginning there was nothing … then Chuck Norris roundhouse kicked nothing and told it to get a job.",
    "When God said, “Let there be light!” Chuck said, “Say Please.”",
    "Chuck Norris has a mug of nails instead of coffee in the morning.",
    "If Chuck Norris were to travel to an alternate dimension in which there was another Chuck Norris and they both fought, they would both win.",
    "The dinosaurs looked at Chuck Norris the wrong way once. You know what happened to them."
]

```

2. Still in facts.py, create an ascii function that will print a portrait made in ascii art. The text file to load is in ``.assets/ascii.txt``

Ok, we made a great package that for sure will be useful for you as a developer! Now it's time to publish it!


### Publish 
#### 1. Document your package
We will start with a simple presentation of the package. In the README.md file, write a description of the package.

#### 2. Config setup.py

In the setup.py file, import the setup method from the setuptools package. You also need to import your own package so chuck_norris in this case. Finally import the ``os`` module, in order to load the README.md file for the long description. 

You will have to initialize the setup method and configure some parameters.

* **name :** The name of your package. Attention, this name must be unique and cannot be already used on pypi.

* **packages :** Root folder of your package

* **package_data :** Directory which contains your txt file

* **version :** For now, we will start with a version `'0.0.1'` (If you don't know the semantics of this version number, you can read it on [Semserver](https://semver.org/)).

* **author :** The author(s) of the package.

* **author_email :** The email of the author(s).

* **keywords :** The keywords that users might use to find your package.

* **description :** A short description of the project (Max 200 characters)

* **long_description :**  A long description. Load the READM.md file that contains the description. (With the os module)

* **long_description_content_type :** The file type for the description. You must specify that it is a markdown file.

* **classifiers :** These are categories, describing who the package is for, what systems it can run on etc... [List of classifiers](https://pypi.org/classifiers/)

* **platforms :** Defines if our package should be limited to one platform or not. Set this parameter to ``ALL''.


#### 3. Compilation 

We need to compile our code in order to make our package publishable. The compilation will generate some files that we will see next.

```
python setup.py bdist_wheel
```

After compilation, you will see some new folders named like these…

**build:** build package information.  
**dist:** Contains your .whl file. A WHL file is a package saved in the Wheel format, which is the standard built-package format used for Python distributions. You can directly install a .whl file using on your system.

```
pip install some_package.whl
```

**project.egg.info**: An egg package contains compiled bytecode, package information, dependency links, and captures the info used by the setup.py test command when running tests.

#### 4. Create an account in pypi.org AND test.pypi.org
Why two accounts in two websites?

Because if you are only curious to know how to do it. Then you should work with [test.pypi.org](test.pypi.org) because it is the server which is getting used to upload the libraries which are made for educational purpose, curiosity, testing and so on. But for right now use [pypi.org](pypi.org)

#### 5. Upload your package 
Now finally you have to just fire another command and you are done uploading your package. Which is different for [pypi.org](pypi.org) and [test.pypi.org](test.pypi.org) (If the name you have chosen is already occupied, you will have to change it).

For pypi.org
```
twine upload -r pypi dist/*
```

For test.pypi.org
```
twine upload -r testpypi dist/*
```
Important thing to know, each time you want to update your package on pypi, you must change the version number at each change, otherwise, it will not work.

## Congratulations! 
You have published your first python package! I hope you see the full potential of this file management system and that in the future, you don't copy and paste your code!